---
layout: post
title: "Startups: something to experience"
---

Well I've just finished my internship at Fidbacks, not crying me eyes out but
nearly. I'm gonna miss a lot of stuff, but the worst will definitely be those
monday morning croissants! :D

It was some experience, working with a week-to-week schedule, sometimes even
day-to-day. I'd always heard about "X startup launched a product which does Y
for Z", but never really got into the innovation business (last year was lab
work, that doesn't count).

**Diving into the startup salad got to me big time.**

So here are a few notable things I learnt from these few last months.

## Make things work, don't compromise

Obviously, this comes first; most of the time I spent at Fidbacks was building
features which were either openly requested by customers or at the top of the
"TODO" list. When doing this, I knew that what I was working on would most
likely be deployed the next week or two, and needed to be pitch-perfect.

I usually could settle with a "it works" version, but by knowing it would
probably be in production on such a short notice, my spirit was filled with
motivation and I needed everything to be **perfect**. Which, in software
development, is a big no-no.

Now this is a well known concept, and you can probably guess what happened.
**Overcomplexity**. More database tables, inheritance, mixins, app-level
libraries and all sorts of other things. Wasted time, complicated diffs and the
very annoying "why did you touch this file?" question when the team leader was
reviewing my PR.

There's nothing like experiencing what you've always heard about.

## Contribute to the software you use

Mainly for open source software that is. During my internship I was frequently
in contact with members of the Ruby community, mainly due to issues with their
software. There's nothing more annoying than finding an awesome gem (library)
that does exactly what you want, with few code/configuration...and it doesn't
work.

In my case, instead of giving up and looking for something else, stubborn as I
can be, I decided to fix the issue most of the time. Now with Github, this is
rather simple: fork, commit and pull-request. Nothing new compared to my
company's workflow at the time, which was rather comfortable.

## Bond with your team

When you're in a large company with many issues and ongoing conflicts, you
can't always take the time to get to know the people you work with. And that
sucks. Obviously, when you're simply trying to get your product on track and
deal with minor bugs with customers or even deciding on the next course of
action for the product, well you're not really thinking about next month's
check and how you can make it bigger. No, you're in a company who isn't old
enough to categorize people and have their whole career planned out...and
therefore **dehumanized**. You're in a company who values one-on-one respect
and self-development through your work. So bond with your team! Enjoy it while
you can. ;)

## Use the latest tools that fit you best
## Fear the unknown

Yep, didn't really feel like filling this in, since it seems a bit obvious.
